full review pre-trial 03 (#19)
epiverse-trace/tutorials-late: episodes/modelling-interventions.Rmd

```{r school}
output_school <- model_default(
  population = uk_population,
  transmission_rate = 2.7 / 5.5,
  infectiousness_rate = 1.0 / 4.0,
  recovery_rate = 1.0 / 5.5,
  intervention = list(contacts = close_schools),
  time_end = 300, increment = 1.0
)
```

To be able to see the effect of our intervention, we also run the model where there is no intervention, combine the two outputs into one data frame and then plot the output. Here we plot the total number of infectious individuals in all age groups using `ggplot2::stat_summary()`:

```{r baseline, echo = TRUE, fig.width = 10}
# run baseline simulation with no intervention
output_baseline <- model_default(
  population = uk_population,
  transmission_rate = 2.7 / 5.5,
  infectiousness_rate = 1.0 / 4.0,
  recovery_rate = 1.0 / 5.5,
  time_end = 300, increment = 1.0
)

# create intervention_type column for plotting
output_school$intervention_type <- "school closure"
output_baseline$intervention_type <- "baseline"
output <- rbind(output_school, output_baseline)

ggplot(data = output[output$compartment == "infectious", ]) +

>   aes(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::aes(
```

    x = time,
    y = value,
    color = intervention_type,
    linetype = intervention_type
  ) +

>   stat_summary(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::stat_summary(
```

    fun = "sum",
    geom = "line",
    linewidth = 1
  ) +

>   scale_y_continuous(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::scale_y_continuous(
```

    labels = scales::comma
  ) +

>   labs(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::labs(
```

    x = "Simulation time (days)",
    y = "Individuals"
  ) +

>   theme_bw(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::theme_bw(
```

    base_size = 15
  ) +

>   geom_vline(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::geom_vline(
```

```{r output_masks}
output_masks <- model_default(
  population = uk_population,
  transmission_rate = 2.7 / 5.5,
  infectiousness_rate = 1.0 / 4.0,
  recovery_rate = 1.0 / 5.5,
  intervention = list(transmission_rate = mask_mandate),
  time_end = 300, increment = 1.0
)
```

```{r plot_masks, echo = TRUE, message = FALSE, fig.width = 10}
# create intervention_type column for plotting
output_masks$intervention_type <- "mask mandate"
output_baseline$intervention_type <- "baseline"
output <- rbind(output_masks, output_baseline)

ggplot(data = output[output$compartment == "infectious", ]) +
  aes(
    x = time,
    y = value,
    color = intervention_type,
    linetype = intervention_type
  ) +
  stat_summary(
    fun = "sum",
    geom = "line",
    linewidth = 1
  ) +
  scale_y_continuous(
    labels = scales::comma
  ) +
  labs(
    x = "Simulation time (days)",
    y = "Individuals"
  ) +
  theme_bw(
    base_size = 15
  ) +
  geom_vline(
    xintercept = c(mask_mandate$time_begin, mask_mandate$time_end),
    colour = "black",
    linetype = "dashed",
    linewidth = 0.2
  ) +

>   annotate(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::annotate(
```

    geom = "text",
    label = "Mask mandate",
    colour = "black",
    x = (mask_mandate$time_end - mask_mandate$time_begin) / 2 +
      mask_mandate$time_begin,
    y = 10,
    angle = 0,
    vjust = "outward"
  )
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout
### Intervention types

> There are two intervention types for `model_default()`. Rate interventions on model parameters (`transmission_rate` $\beta$, `infectiousness_rate` $\sigma$ and `recovery_rate` $\gamma$) and contact matrix reductions `contacts`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two intervention types for `model_default()`. Rate interventions on model parameters (`transmission_rate` $\beta$, `infectiousness_rate` $\sigma$ and `recovery_rate` $\gamma$) and contact matrix reductions (`contacts`).
```

> To implement both contact and rate interventions in the same simulation they must be passed as a list, e.g., `intervention = list(transmission_rate = mask_mandate, contacts = close_schools)`. But if there are multiple interventions that target contact rates, these must be passed as one `contacts` input. See the [vignette on modelling overlapping interventions](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epidemics/articles/multiple_interventions.html) for more detail. 

Author: ```suggestion
To implement both contact and rate interventions in the same simulation they must be passed as a list, e.g., `intervention = list(transmission_rate = mask_mandate, contacts = close_schools)`. But if there are multiple interventions that target contact rates, these must be passed as one `contacts` input. See the [vignette on modelling overlapping interventions](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epidemics/articles/modelling_multiple_interventions.html) for more detail. 
```

> To implement both contact and rate interventions in the same simulation they must be passed as a list e.g. `intervention = list(transmission_rate = mask_mandate, contacts = close_schools)`. But if there are multiple interventions that target contact rates, these must be passed as one `contacts` input. See the [vignette on modelling overlapping interventions](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epidemics/articles/multiple_interventions.html) for more detail. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement both contact and rate interventions in the same simulation they must be passed as a list, e.g., `intervention = list(transmission_rate = mask_mandate, contacts = close_schools)`. But if there are multiple interventions that target contact rates, these must be passed as one `contacts` input. See the [vignette on modelling overlapping interventions](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epidemics/articles/multiple_interventions.html) for more detail. 
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Pharmaceutical interventions

> Pharmaceutical interventions (PIs) are measures such as vaccination and mass treatment programs. In the previous section, we assumed that interventions reduced the value of parameter values while the intervention was in place. In the case of vaccination, we assume that after the intervention individuals are no longer susceptible and should be classified into a different disease state. Therefore, we specify the rate at which individuals are vaccinated and track the number of vaccinated individuals through time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pharmaceutical interventions (PIs) are measures such as vaccination and mass treatment programs. In the previous section, we integrated the interventions into the model by reducing  parameter values during specific period of time window in which these intervention set to take place. In the case of vaccination, we assume that after the intervention individuals are no longer susceptible and should be classified into a different disease state. Therefore, we specify the rate at which individuals are vaccinated and track the number of vaccinated individuals over time. 
```

The diagram below shows the SEIRV model implemented using `model_default()` where susceptible individuals are vaccinated and then move to the $V$ class.

```{r diagram_SEIRV, echo = FALSE, message = FALSE}
DiagrammeR::grViz("digraph {

  # graph statement
  #################
  graph [layout = dot,
         rankdir = LR,
         overlap = true,
         fontsize = 10]

  # nodes
  #######
  node [shape = square,
       fixedsize = true
       width = 1.3]

       S
       E
       I
       R
       V

  # edges
  #######
  S -> E [label = ' infection (&beta;)']
  S -> V [label = ' vaccination (&nu;)']
  E -> I [label = ' onset of \ninfectiousness (&alpha;)']
  I -> R [label = ' recovery (&gamma;)']

}")
```

The equations describing this model are as follows: 

$$
\begin{aligned}
\frac{dS_i}{dt} & = - \beta S_i \sum_j C_{i,j} I_j -\nu_{t} S_i \\
\frac{dE_i}{dt} &= \beta S_i\sum_j C_{i,j} I_j - \alpha E_i \\
\frac{dI_i}{dt} &= \alpha E_i - \gamma I_i \\
\frac{dR_i}{dt} &=\gamma I_i \\
\frac{dV_i}{dt} & =\nu_{i,t} S_i\\
\end{aligned}
$$

> Individuals are vaccinated at an age group ($i$) specific time dependent ($t$) vaccination rate ($\nu_{i,t}$). The SEIR components of these equations are described in the tutorial [simulating transmission](../episodes/simulating-transmission.md#simulating-disease-spread). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Individuals in age group ($i$)  at specific time dependent ($t$)  are vaccinated at rate ($\nu_{i,t}$). The other SEIR components of these equations are described in the tutorial [simulating transmission](../episodes/simulating-transmission.md#simulating-disease-spread). 
```

> To explore the effect of vaccination we need to create a vaccination object to pass as an input into `model_default()` that includes an age groups specific vaccination rate `nu` and age group specific start and end times of the vaccination program (`time_begin` and `time_end`). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To explore the effect of vaccination we need to create a vaccination object to pass as an input into `model_default()` that includes  age groups specific vaccination rate `nu` and age groups specific start and end times of the vaccination program (`time_begin` and `time_end`). 
```

> Here we will assume all age groups are vaccinated at the same rate 0.01 and that the vaccination program starts on day 40 and is in place for 150 days.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we will assume all age groups are vaccinated at the same rate 0.01 and that the vaccination program starts on day 40 and continue to be in place for 150 days.
```

```{r vaccinate}
# prepare a vaccination object

> vaccinate <- vaccination(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vaccinate <- epidemics::vaccination(
```

  name = "vaccinate all",
  time_begin = matrix(40, nrow(contact_matrix)),
  time_end = matrix(40 + 150, nrow(contact_matrix)),
  nu = matrix(c(0.01, 0.01, 0.01))
)
```

> We pass our vaccination object using `vaccination = vaccinate`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We pass our vaccination object into the model using argument `vaccination = vaccinate`:
```

```{r output_vaccinate}

> output_vaccinate <- model_default(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
output_vaccinate <- epidemics::model_default(
```

  population = uk_population,
  transmission_rate = 2.7 / 5.5,
  infectiousness_rate = 1.0 / 4.0,
  recovery_rate = 1.0 / 5.5,
  vaccination = vaccinate,
  time_end = 300, increment = 1.0
)
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Compare interventions

Plot the three interventions vaccination, school closure and mask mandate and the baseline simulation on one plot. Which intervention reduces the peak number of infectious individuals the most?

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution 

## Output

```{r plot_vaccinate, echo = TRUE, message = FALSE, fig.width = 10}
# create intervention_type column for plotting
output_vaccinate$intervention_type <- "vaccination"
output <- rbind(output_school, output_masks, output_vaccinate, output_baseline)

> ggplot(data = output[output$compartment == "infectious", ]) +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ggplot2::ggplot(data = output[output$compartment == "infectious", ]) +
```

>   aes(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::aes(
```

    x = time,
    y = value,
    color = intervention_type,
    linetype = intervention_type
  ) +

>   stat_summary(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::stat_summary(
```

    fun = "sum",
    geom = "line",
    linewidth = 1
  ) +

>   scale_y_continuous(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::scale_y_continuous(
```

    labels = scales::comma
  ) +

>   labs(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::labs(
```

    x = "Simulation time (days)",
    y = "Individuals"
  ) +

>   theme_bw(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ggplot2::theme_bw(
```

    base_size = 15
  )
```

From the plot we see that the peak number of total number of infectious individuals when vaccination is in place is much lower compared to school closures and mask wearing interventions. 

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Summary

> Different types of intervention can be implemented using mathematical modelling. Modelling interventions requires assumptions of which model parameters are affected (e.g. contact matrices, transmission rate), by what magnitude and and what times in the simulation of an outbreak. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Different types of intervention can be implemented using mathematical modelling. Modelling interventions requires assumptions of which model parameters are affected (e.g. contact matrices, transmission rate), and by what magnitude  and what times in the simulation of an outbreak. 
```
